No, it was really good.
Ah, very good morning everyone.
Good morning. See you.
Alright, the cast.
Alright. Did it last one in.
Thank you. Alright. Good morning.
Um, minister, um, right,
the Climate Change Commission publishes
Emissions Reduction Monitoring Report.
The Minister for Climate Change must table
formal response in the House.
He did so back in October.
Sponsors automatically referred
to the Environment Committee, which has 60 working days
to examine it and report to the house, uh,
by 3rd of January, environment invite committee invited
several public, um, sector organizations
to make written comment on this response.
The invitation leaders are listed,
their submissions are under 2.2 and will be released
after today's meeting environment.
Also invited the minister for a 30 minute hearing
to talk about, and this is what we are doing now.
So, over to you, Simon. Well, thank you very much.
Happy remarks, and we'll go for questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much, uh,
and very good morning, uh, chair and committee members.
Thanks for the opportunity to address, uh, the inquiry
and I'm sure everyone is anxious to ask questions,
so I'll keep my, uh, remarks, uh, very brief.
Uh, and then we'll get into some q and a.
First and foremost, wanna introduce, uh, two of the team.
We've got Sam Buckle here, who's the Deputy Secretary
for the Ministry for the Environment,
and also, uh, Kirsty Flanagan,
who's the executive, uh, director.
Both are heavily involved in terms of, uh, this report.
Uh, so this is an inquiry into the government's response
to the Commission's 2025 emissions, uh,
reduction monitoring report.
Uh, I'm happy to take any specific questions you have about,
uh, the government's response.
I want to emphasize that for a large part, uh,
we support the commission's findings.
Uh, I'd note too that our response drew on the 2025
emissions projections, which weren't available
to the commission, uh, when it were prepared.
Uh, its report, the commission's report, uh, found
that New Zealand is likely
to meet its first emissions budget
and can meet its second, uh, budget.
Our assessment informed by the 2025 projections confirms
that we are on track, uh, to meet Target nine, uh,
and our first and second emissions budgets.
The government's most recent projections released, uh,
last month have us, uh,
coming in at 7.8 million ton under the first emissions
budget and 4.5 million ton under the
second emissions budget.
That's a, a larger buffer than what was projected in 2024,
reflecting an improved progress towards our climate
change targets.
While the 2025 projections show a gap of 7.9 million ton
to meet the third emissions budget,
that gap is actually reduced by 1.3 million ton compared to
where we were in 2024.
In the projections, I want to create a future
where our economy and our communities thrive
and where we can deliver value, uh,
for money in the climate transition.
The government can't deliver our climate goals alone.
Uh, the private sector has a significant role to play,
which is why we're working with some
of New Zealand's largest industries to support them,
to decarbonize a range
of factors impacting our progress towards a target.
Some of those are not, uh, within our control,
but some are obviously,
and that's why it's important that we continue to review
and refine our climate policy settings to ensure
that they remain effective and practical.
My final point, uh, Mr.
Chair, is, is that staying, this is all about, uh, ensuring
that we are staying on track.
The second emissions reduction plan includes an adaptive
management approach, which tracks progress.
It reviews the risks that we face,
and also importantly, enables timely action for us
to keep on track to meet the second emissions budget.
And with that, uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
I'm happy to take questions from the committee. Thank
You. If I have just,
uh, two people have hands up for questions,
uh, Deborah and then Chloe. So I'll start with Deborah.
Thank you. Um, thank you minister.
Um, minister looking, uh, page 11 of your response.
You talk about using adaptive management.
Can you explain what you mean by adaptive management and,
Yes. So when we refer
to adaptive management, it's taken
to account, uh, how, uh, things are changing, uh,
in the context of emissions reduction within the
New Zealand, uh, economy.
I'll give you an example of that.
Uh, this morning on RNZ,
and this is real time, um,
there was an interview with Eco Pond.
And Eco Pond, uh, noted that they are in the process
of rolling at a pilot of that on farm.
Uh, however, they have now have the intention of, uh,
as quoted going to a thousand farms in the next few years.
Uh, well, in our emissions reduction plan
that was published last year, we had an expectations
that there would be 250 dairy farms having that technology
by the mid 2030s.
And so that's just an example, again, outside
of government control, but how industry
and those factors are, and
that's obviously has a quite a significant play in regards
to methane reduction for, so that's an example
of adapters management.
Things change. We reassess that.
We make sure that our plans are reflective of the best
and available information.
So what sort of timeframes do you envisage your adaptive
management working over?
Um, well, in effect, we have a, an ongoing process, uh,
in the context of taking on board such
as events, uh, uh, today.
Uh, and we are continuing
and as minister continuing assessing what options.
We have formalized processes where we need
to update our missions reduction plan,
which is a standard governance process,
and we do a consultation with the public on that.
Uh, we also have governance mechanisms, uh, within,
um, the ministerial groups.
I have accountability for delivery of the targets,
but minister of agriculture, minister
of Transport have responsibility.
So there's a matrix, uh,
of ministers that are involved in that.
And we, uh, you know, catch up on a, uh, formal basis.
And then we've got target nine,
which is the prime ministerial targets,
and that is a quarterly reporting cycle as well. So,
So one of the things that concerns me is a, a lot
of the work that need we need to do in the, um,
particularly in the removal space, is it's quite,
takes quite a long time.
So, you know, a forest takes about five years from planting
until when it starts to actually sequester a significant
amount of carbon and things like that.
So, uh, worried that the timeframes we need
to operate over don't really match up
with this adaptive management.
It sounds like, um, the, we need
to be thinking not just sort of immediate adaptation
to what's going on, but things
that are happening out 5, 10, 15, 20 years.
So how does this adaptive management work with the fact
that we operating over quite long time scales as well?
Sure. It's definitely a case that the,
The seeds we plant today have enduring benefit
and, uh, over the long term, uh, in that context.
But in terms of adaptive management, the,
the commission sites, uh, examples in their report of
what they would expect, uh,
a government would be looking at in regards
to adaptive management.
They refer particularly
around agricultural technology innovation, uh,
as an area acknowledging there is huge progress and pace.
Uh, that is definitely an area
where the government is looking at.
They also cite, uh, areas in regards to, uh, energy, uh,
and renewable energy
and battery technology and things like that.
Again, you know, the electrify New Zealand
and the RMA reforms
that we're doing are making it a lot easier
to build new generation of renewable energy.
So, so that's what the, the, um, commission have cited is
where the government, you know, as examples of
what they would like to see the government doing in regard
to adaptive management.
I'm now providing, you know, examples of
what the government is doing, which shows that there is,
you know, quite a degree of alignment around that.
It is, to your point, a challenging area
and any forward look is always comes with a degree
of uncertainty because of forecast.
But you know, it is fair to say that, uh, you know,
as a government, we need to be doing every you as much
as we can in the context of delivery here
and now to lock in those benefits in the future. And that's
One more, one mores and then I'll for close that, right?
Oh, uh, just, well, I want to move on to the ETS.
No, no. Can we come up with a new primary and then I'll,
and I'll put you back on the list.
That's okay. A new primary.
No, I'll, and I'll give Chloe a go and then back
To me. Alright. Okay.
So, oh, let's just move on
for that adaptive management then.
So I want to go, come back on the ET that's
Up on adaptive management as well.
Okay. Far away. Far away then Chloe. Thank you.
Yeah. Um, so just on that point
of adaptive management minister, I'm wondering
how you're applying that approach in the context
of the industry coming forward
and saying that your CCUs, uh, what you've banked on
with regard to carbon capture technology
and your emissions budget
and in your emissions reduction plan is completely
economically unfeasible with the state
of the ETS at the moment and the price of carbon.
So how is your adaptive management approach working when
you've got the industry coming out
and saying that the CCUs, which will bank on
for fully a third of your reductions
are economically unfeasible?
Yeah, uh, thanks, uh, for the question, Chloe.
So we're talking about our carbon capture
and storage, uh, when we refer to CCUS, uh,
and the, um, policy elements around that was part
of our missions reduction plan.
The government remains committed
to putting in place the regulatory model
and enablement for that framework to happen.
And that work continues, uh, to be done
by the government, uh, at present.
A couple of things that have happened subsequently.
Obviously an update in regards to the, uh, amount of
or lack of gas that New Zealand has, uh,
has been a pretty fundamental, um, aspect.
Uh, you know, with respect,
there's no emissions if you've got no gas.
Uh, and we're in a position,
we've got significantly less gas as well.
We're continuing the work around making sure
that the framework and the enablement of
that is in place for CCUS.
Uh, but in the context of, you know, the reality of where
that market is, I think that's the more fundamental issue
that we've been advised as the problem statement.
We've said, okay, you know, we're not going to do nothing.
We're gonna continue the work.
Uh, but, you know, um, I think that's
where the real challenges
around CCUS in a New Zealand context.
Sorry, I I I'm just not quite clear on that.
Minister, you said that you've got an adaptive management
approach where you respond to risks.
We've heard loud and clear from the industry
that these CCUs are completely economically unfeasible with,
uh, the carbon price being what it is at the moment.
Are you telling us that you're just simply
investigating these issues or
that you have a solid tangible plan?
Because right now there's a whole of a third, fully a third
of what you're banking on for your emissions reduction plan?
Uh, no. What I'm saying to you is, is that, uh, you need
to have gas in order to create the emissions.
Uh, what we've had is information in regards to the fact
that we do not have, and we've significantly less gas, uh,
in the New Zealand market than what we thought we did.
Part of the, um, review and,
and the updating of plans also looks at
how much emissions we will produce mm-hmm.
Versus how much we are going to reduce.
Uh, we've got a demand
and a supply dynamic happening in this conversation.
We are still continuing to do work
around the regulatory enablement of
how you would reduce emissions on gas,
but I'm saying, you know, uh, you know, zero times Yeah.
Times one is zero, you know, like,
and so that's the dynamic in play.
I just might have a sup on
this, please, if I mind, and then
we'll cut. You got a primary?
I've got a primary if I may. Yeah,
Yeah. Yes, Scott, I'll just
take a quick sip if that's alright.
Um, uh, thank you.
Um, oh, just in terms of adaptive management, what,
with respect to, uh, other examples, what do you see in the,
in terms of from the business community, I'm thinking of,
uh, uh, uh, uh, companies like Fonterra
and what they're doing with their, uh, farmer suppliers
around the cognitive difference, incentives, incentives
to help drive change in that space.
And what are you, what else are you seeing?
What are, what are you seeing?
How are you finding that working? Well?
Well, first and foremost, we're seeing some,
some really great leadership coming out
of the agricultural sector.
Obviously you backbone the economy, uh, carbon efficient,
um, farmers, some of the best in the world.
And so we should be, so first of all, we should be proud of,
of their contribution.
What we saw in regards to the latest projection numbers
around methane, uh, is, is that the, uh,
particularly in the 2030, uh, NDC uh, gap methane, uh,
is, you know, below the 10% target.
Now, partly that is
because actually the agricultural sector is becoming
significantly more successful, uh, than
what it was, uh, in the past.
And so on one hand, yeah, we should celebrate that,
that's a great thing for an export led nation that,
but there is a challenge, uh,
off the back of that, around emission.
So I'm just just signaling that, that when you're dealing
with this conversation, you're balancing the realities of,
of New Zealand's, uh, economic drivers
and the fact that that does have a correlation in regards
to emissions, and we need to deal with both of those.
Uh, so the agricultural sector, I think, you know,
the example I used around Frontier
and sin layer around Eco Ponds, a great example.
There's a number of other techs, the LIC work just out
of the, in the wata around animal genetics.
That's right. I, you know, for those that have been there
and seen some of that mm-hmm.
Not just on climate emissions reduction,
but actually more on productivity of animals.
Yeah. How can they produce more product, uh,
for the same animal
and actually even some of that heat tolerance tech
that's available where, you know, we're seeing, um,
you know, broader temperature rise not only here,
but in other jurisdictions,
and know we need to make sure that our animals from a
welfare and a production point of view can deal with that.
And so New Zealand's leading the charge on that, that's,
that's gonna deal with productivity,
which is an economic element and lease emissions as well.
And that's just one example of stuff
that Agri Zero are working on, uh, more broadly.
Thank you. Uh, right, Chloe? Yeah. Primary from cle.
Yeah. So in your executive summary minister,
you are quoting from the Climate Change Commission's report,
which says that there are significant risks
to us meeting emissions budget too.
But then further on just a paragraph down, you go on
to say that we're on track.
I mean, surely you understand
that these two statements are fundamentally inconsistent,
let alone when you marry that with the reality
that in just the past four months since, uh,
you have responded, or rather since the Climate Change
Commission issued their report
and you have responded, there have been a range of new risks
that the government has introduced,
namely weakening the clean vehicle standards, once again,
committing tens of billions of dollars to a handful
of new motorways and untethering the emissions trading
scheme from the Paris Agreement, as well
as announcing a gutting
of climate reporting for large corporations.
Most people would understand all of these actions
to increase those very significant risks,
which the Climate Change Commission said were present.
How do you interpret that other than an increase in
that very risk that has been identified?
So the way in which I interpret that is I actually look at
how are we progressing against our targets
and what are those numbers.
So if we work our way through, in regards
to emissions budget, one, we are currently, um, uh,
projecting to be over budget, IE over deliver
by 7.8 million ton.
That's 3% nearly ahead of budget in regards to EB two,
we are 4.5 million ton ahead of budget.
We'll be over by 1.5%.
And in EB three, we are behind budget by 7.9,
which is the equivalent of 3%.
That is, um, uh, looking out, uh, to, uh, 2030,
uh, uh, five, uh, period.
And we've got a, a plus or minus margin of error of 3%.
I mean, with respect and in knowing about forecasts
and forward look, where there is inherent uncertainty more
so the further out you go where we are sitting today,
it is plus, or well, it's plus 3%, 3.3.
Okay. Not 30, not 53.
Uh, and I think in the context of, of, you know, just being,
um, considerate and balanced around where we're at
and how we're tracking, uh, that is why I am confident
that in the context of what we are doing
and the actions we have underway, uh, we have a, uh,
credible pathway to meet the budgets
of which this government is committed to.
I mean, sorry, if I may, Mr.
Chair sub respectfully minister, um,
we're talking about the things
that you actually have control over.
What I hear, I'm trying
to flesh out is the significant risks
that the Climate Change Commission has identified you
yourself are speaking about inherent uncertainty.
What that would tend to mean as the Minister
of Climate change, if you were taking responsibility
for mitigation, is to take action early.
This is something that's the Climate Change Commission put
in their report, particularly when it comes to meeting, uh,
EB three and making, um, ERP three.
So I guess the point that I am, the question
that I am asking you is how can you perceive
that you have not increased that risk,
especially in the climate, if the inherent uncertainty
that you yourself have just identified when you have under
EB one shredded approximately three dozen of the actions,
uh, under ERP one rather, uh, as well as made a number
of significant steps
to downgrade climate ambition in just the past year alone,
how can you not perceive that
as an increase in risk in this inherently risky
and uncertain environment?
Well, because I'm not into perception, I'm into facts.
And when I look at the numbers in regards
to the 2024 emissions projections versus the 2025
projections, we have improved the position in terms
of closing the gap on EB one and EB two.
The numbers are there, they're in the projections.
We are making more progress than
what we thought at this point last year.
That's the numbers. Um,
and we can talk about everything else,
but that's what counts.
And so from our point of view,
we are continuing to look at other options.
The adaptive management,
which the Climate Change Commission has suggested
around energy, uh, aspects
and agriculture are two areas
that this government is heavily supporting.
Um, we've seen more new generation
and renewables in the last 18 months, in the last 15 years.
Um, we should be celebrating our progress as a country,
and that will all help decarbonization,
it would all help actually, economic cost of living
because of the challenges around energy prices.
So that's why I'm confident,
Again, respectfully minister, what, I'm
Just last, last up.
Okay. Close. All right.
Yeah. Respectfully, minister, what I'm trying
to do here is demarcate between the context of, uh, things
that are happening regardless of government action
and the very actions that government is undertaking.
And I am just asking you straight up, as the Minister
of Climate change about the facts
that you have shredded a number of climate action policies,
uh, you yourself have also acknowledged in your own response
to the Climate Change Commission that those numbers
that you're citing and us being on track is largely part
of luck and also accounting changes.
Yes. So do you genuinely believe as Minister
of Climate Change, that you have not introduced more of
that significant risk
that the Climate Change Commission has identified by virtue
of moving backwards on a number of the things
that were already in train under the previous government,
which had actually put us on track for meeting EB one?
Well, first and foremost, you know, I, I deeply, uh,
disagree with the sentiment in which you are saying there is
no luck in the fact that New Zealand farmers are some
of the best, uh, and most carbon efficient
farmers in the world.
There is no luck. I'm
Saying it has nothing to do with Government
minister around climate reduction.
Um, you know, with respect, we have got significant, uh,
work underway by amazing New Zealanders across tech,
across innovation, across agri,
who are really doing their best to increase economic growth
and productivity, but also reduce emissions.
Guess there are factors that are outside of our control,
um, but guess what?
That's life. Um,
but in the context of the things
that government can control,
and we are focusing on the things that we should control,
the market has a major role here as well.
Right. Uh, and the things that we can do, such
as removing consenting
and regulation around, you know, renewables
and that stuff, uh, making sure all mines we're being pro
around, uh, uh, around, uh, energy transition.
That's all things that we can control
and that are the things that we're doing. Okay. Right.
Um, so you got a s on this?
Yeah, it's just around the emissions budgets
and of course they were set.
Um, and this, your response came out, well,
not quite sure when, but um, in
between the emissions budgets was set with a methane target
in the act of between 24 and 47%.
Um, and recently you announced a change to
that methane budget, uh, target of between 14
and 24%.
Um, how is that going to impact so
that on those emissions budgets?
Because if we're trying to, uh, if we reduce the amount of,
of what we're doing with methane, how's
that taken into account
and how you're going to meet those budgets going out?
Has it been taken into account on the budgets,
or are we gonna see a change in those budgets?
Yeah, so it's fair to say that we are doing a, uh,
process of consultation.
I might just ask, uh, one of the team just
to give you a quick overview of what that process
Well to, first of all, on the budgets,
budgets haven't changed, so that's the Right, okay.
The key thing to be clear, so our emissions budgets remain,
uh, for EB uh, one, they remain 290 mega tons
for EB 2 305 and for E 3 240.
So just be clear about, about that.
Um, in respect to, uh,
so the second part of the question, sorry,
Was just that those, how are we going
to achieve those budgets?
We're gonna have to take some actions given we've reduced,
they were, those budgets were set with that methane range,
but we've changed the methane range.
Yeah. So we may not have to change the budget.
We're have to change what we do
to meet those budgets, though.
So, well, there's some of
that adaptive management going on in this space as well.
Yeah. So we still remain, the projections still stand, uh,
as outlined by the minister,
and we still do remain, um, on track for E one
and just on E one, to be clear on E one.
Mm-hmm. Um, most of the emissions
and E one have actually already now occurred.
Yeah. They're not actually projections.
So that, you know, there's a some element of, of that budget
of still a projection, but, so there's a reasonable level
of confidence on EB one, EB two, um, uh,
rejection standards.
They are, and they're not actually impacted by the
proposed change or the decision
the government's made to change.
I really think, um, not
have you got, is this Yeah, one sec.
Very quickly. Yep. Because I need change
time. Five minutes left quick
Up, uh, minister, you said that, uh, the role
of the market is big and that government is smaller
and that one of the things that you've done is enabled more
renewable energy.
And I'm wondering what referring to there,
and if that is the fast track amendment
or not The Fast Amendment.
The Fast Track Approvals Act, uh,
which enables coal mines.
Uh, so what we're, uh, what I was signaling there
is in effect making it faster, easier,
and cheaper to be able to build more energy generation
and transmission, uh, capacity in New Zealand.
And that is across all aspects of energy.
Uh, and what we are then citing is the fact
that if you look at the forward look pipeline
of new generation underway at the moment,
significantly more than what has been in the past.
Also the signaling by this government in terms
of being very pro
and supportive of more generation is also a part of that.
It'd be fair to say in the context of
that we are talking about all energy, uh, uh, capability,
uh, and sources, uh,
because, you know, we need firming capacity
and thermal firming, uh, in order
to ensure that we can keep the lights on.
And that, and Ryan,
oh, also, have you got your supplements? Yeah,
I did. I did have a supplement
just on adaptive management.
I think, um, on Debra Russell was gonna
ask a question about the ets.
Yeah. But, um, she framed it in a slightly different way.
No, I've got a, I've got a different
Primary on the ets.
Right. Yeah.
If we've got time for that, I'd like to come back
To, yeah, Ryan has a give, um, thanks.
Mine was sort of primary,
but we kind of moved onto it anyway.
If the energy sector supply, um,
you've just touched on reviewing the electricity market.
I know it's probably a little bit preemptive,
but do you, can you sort of see what might come out of
that in terms of, you know,
supporting the ecosystem a bit broader or,
Well, first and foremost, uh, the major focus
for me is minister in that context is around affordability,
uh, and energy security.
We've got the energy security considerations underway, uh,
through the work that we are doing.
And also, you know, announcements
by the market more generally.
That's important from emissions reduction point of view, uh,
because you know, the more, uh, capacity
that we can have in our system,
and particularly in the renewable space, uh,
and the more energy generation we have within our economy,
and the more abundant by the cheaper that that source is,
the faster the transition, particularly in transport,
if you think about, uh, the opportunities in that space,
but also equally in industry in terms of low
and medium heat, uh, processing as well,
which there still remains, uh, opportunities,
but the economics consideration taking account
where we've come to from, in terms
of economic cycle has been, uh, a hurdle rate,
which has been challenging.
So that's what we're doing around in the energy space,
making it easier, faster, and cheaper.
Uh, and, you know, getting rid of the, the bureaucracy
and regulation around that.
And importantly, are we seeing good progress?
Well, yes, we are. We're seeing a really positive forward
look around, uh, gen projects.
Uh, and that is great.
Again, for most periods in, in October,
New Zealand was sitting at 99% of the, uh, generation
for electricity, the lights, uh, at 99%.
And I sort of got up on a stage in Australia
where every other country were there
and they're going, oh yeah, 99.
You know, like that's, we should be proud of that.
It's a pretty, we like 99% proud.
That's like unbelievable. So
Very Good. Despite
the government's best efforts.
No, yeah. Thank you. Just
Fight on the 1% Chloe, if you want.
I mean, if you wanna keep investing in oil and gas. Yeah.
So, um, the ETS minister
and, um, in, uh, page 14, your table three,
um, uh, a bit of discussion around the ETS and risks to it
and your responses.
Um, saying that it's the primary tool
for driving reductions, um,
and we need to maintain a credible
and effective scheme for the emissions trading scheme.
Um, last week, Tuesday night, eight o'clock,
you announced some changes.
Um, and amongst them was decoupling, um,
our nationally determined contribution from the unit prices
and volumes in the ETS
and overnight, the, um, carbon price dropped by 10%
and it's now carbon is now trading at about $45 a ton last
time I've looked, which might have been yesterday.
Um, so, um, that seems like a whole lot
of instability in the ETS
and of course, for the EETS to be an effective tool,
people need a lot of, um, predictability for markers
to operate effectively, it needs to be not a speculative,
uh, e ts can't be a speculative tool.
There's gotta be a really effective pricing tool,
and yet those actions just don't work up that.
So how are you gonna take the ETS forward, which is,
you're saying you're relying on it,
which is one thing you said it's, yeah, exactly.
There's a real puzzle there. Correct.
So first and foremost, uh, it is important to acknowledge
that, you know, we do as a government,
see the ETS doing the heavy lifting
and the reduction of, uh, carbon emissions.
Obviously methane sits out in a different area.
The reality of how, uh, government policy announcements
and changes impact that market, uh, is a, uh,
quite a unique one.
And the Conex that, um, majority of
that is market sensitive.
You can't consult with the
market in regards to those changes.
So there is always gonna be a degree of, um, digestion
of those announcements in the context
of the way in which the market price is set.
Uh, we take a long-term perspective in regards to that.
Uh, the government has been clear around the need, uh,
for certainty, why are we, um, we're doing, uh,
and announcing those changes.
We want more certainty in the market over the long term than
what currently is in the place.
Because the reason why we're making that change is
because when the legislation was drafted, um,
the ETS market deals solely
with domestic emissions reduction.
And that accordance test, um, basically included
and made sort of look
and include international targets, uh, which was not,
and is not the purpose of the ETS.
Uh, we have other mechanisms to deal with with that portion,
if you think about what we're doing
around methane particularly, uh,
and then other optionality in terms of, um,
cooperation with other countries.
So that's the reason why we're doing that.
Uh, and again, you know, we don't,
we're not gonna get flinch of sort of
where markets are at week in, week out, day in, day out.
Uh, these are long term markets.
One of the worries was that drop of the price chair.
I have a sub on it. One, could I have my,
we're nearly at time, really appreciate,
I think time have a s 'cause you've
Had, you have Had plenty of opportunities.
Um, minister I'm really interested in the role
of industrial allocations in the system.
I, I, I, I understand there's been reports that price
of electricity, uh, has increased sometimes by up to $60,
uh, per megawatt hour by the ETS price when, when the cost
of electricity and the cost of paying for emissions flows
through into manufacturing costs, uh, I understand that
that risks New Zealand domestic manufacturing, uh,
if our overseas competitors are not paying that price.
So just want to give your, uh, your assessment a bit
of a rundown on the role of industrial allocations
in terms of these years.
Yeah. So one of the key changes
that the government has signaled
and the announcements last week, uh, is, uh, in regards
to the, uh, way in which industrial allocations, uh, affect,
uh, those major industrials.
Think about Golden Base cement's a good example, uh,
up in Northland, uh,
which are heavily impacted alongside many other industries,
things as it stands at the moment in the current law.
Um, the Minister of Climate Change has the ability to,
in effect, change the underlying settings, you know,
every five years for those type of industries.
Well, they're buying as, you know, big industrial kit.
They need certainty around what
that's gonna be over the long period.
We have made a very sensible
and pragmatic change as a result of working with industry
that we've taken away that five year
and making sure that it's a 10 year window
that gives investment certainty over the long term.
We need those kind
and they're doing a lot to decarbonize as well up there,
and they should be acknowledged for that.
Uh, but we've taken through our change in regards
to industrial allocations at the government announced last
week, that uncertainty off the table.
And I think while it hasn't been in too much spoken about it
by certain commentators in the market for, for, uh, reasons,
I think it is an important, uh, certainty aspect.
The government's done. Your point around energy
considerations around the role of ETS pricing, I mean,
that applies across the broader market.
You know, from a simplicity point of view, uh,
the ETS marketplace applies to the, to the whole economy.
There is significant, uh, challenges when you start
to pull bits of an economy in
and out in terms of the fundamental underpinning
of the credibility of that market.
And hence why as a government, uh, we've, uh, uh,
been pretty clear, we have been clear that
that ETS market needs to include all industries context,
excluding agriculture.
Thank you everybody. Well, thank you minister.
Appreciate your time. You've been generous enough.
Give us two extra minutes. So thank you.
Thank you. Thanks very much, committee.
I really appreciate opportunity meeting.
Thanks everybody. Thank, um,
and good luck with getting caught for Australia.
Yeah, thank you. Uh, Deborah
and I will be doing our, yeah, cool.
Yeah, let's that.